Hello, everyone. Welcome to a new episode of the
Dissenter. I'm your host, as always, Ricardo Lopez, and
today I'm joined by for a 4th time by
Doctor David Benatar. And today we're talking about his
latest book, Very Practical Ethics Engaging Everyday Moral Questions.
So, Doctor Benatar, welcome back on the show. It's
always a pleasure to everyone.
Thank you very much. It was a pleasure to
be with you.
So, I mean, it's very interesting because you go
through a lot of different kinds of, uh, ethical
questions that people might face in their everyday lives.
You talk, for example, about sex, the environment, smoking,
giving aid, consumption of animal products, the certain uses
of language. But before we get into some of
those examples, let me start by, uh, let me
start by asking. Asking you some general questions. So
first of all, what is practical ethics and how
do common problems that people face differ from, for
example, scenarios, explore in ethics that affect maybe only
a select number of people or even thought experiments
involving events that problem, that probably no one is
ever going to be faced with.
Sure, well, the area of practical ethics is much
broader than I'm covering in this particular book. Practical
ethics is concerned, as the name suggests, with practical
ethical problems. There are areas of ethics that look
into questions, for example, about what makes a right
action right or a wrong action wrong, and they
will sometimes refer to examples and as you know,
sometimes those examples are going to be highly theorized
and theoretical ones, hypothetical ones. But the area of
practical practical ethics is really interested in what we
ought practically to do. But it does include Questions
that go beyond what I look at in this
book because what I'm interested in or what I'm
calling very practical ethical questions or to use a
term that I've used elsewhere, quotidian ethical problems. These
are problems that confront ordinary people in their everyday
lives. So if you think about the question of
abortion or capital punishment, these are practical ethical questions.
But they're not quotidian problems. They're not problems that
an individual is going to face in their everyday
life. Hopefully, questions about abortion will be relatively rare
in any individual's life and perhaps absent in many
other people's lives. Questions about the moral justice viability
of capital punishment. These are questions that the state
really needs to engage. These are not questions that
people are going to be confronting in their ordinary
life. And simply they're going to be questions about
professional ethics, ethical questions that arise within particular roles,
public roles, and that falls beyond the scope of
what I'm looking at here. I'm, I'm interested in
these quotidian ethical questions in this book.
And do you approach the ethical problems you deal
with in the book from the point of view
of any specific ethical theory, like, for example, consequentialism,
the ontology or virtue ethics?
No, in fact, I specifically try to bracket the
disagreements there are between those different theoretical positions because
my worry is that if I adopt a particular
theoretical view, and then I spell out what the
implications of that would be for the practical issues,
that this will then not be of interest to
people who don't accept the background theoretical view. So
I try to engage the practical issues uh in
their own terms. Sometimes it will make a difference
what your background theory is, and then I might
uh point to those differences. But in general, I'm
not wanting to assume a particular ethical theory.
And what do right and wrong mean in the
context of practical ethics?
Well, that's one of the questions that I look
at in the introduction to the book, and I
point out that those terms like right and wrong
are actually multiply ambiguous. They can mean different things.
So the word right for could mean, for example,
something that is required, an action that is morally
required, or it could mean simply an action that
is morally permissible, so not required and not prohibited,
but it might also mean an action that has
some kind of moral value. Without being morally required.
So if you, sometimes if you say it's the
right thing to do, it's not that you're technically
required to do it, but you get moral credit
for doing it. And then there's also the abstract
noun version of right that is a right, a
right to not be killed, for example. And so
these are very ambiguous terms, and one of the
things I try to do in the introduction is
to disambiguate them and get some clarity.
So one more general question before we get into
a specific example you exploring the book. So, um,
how does ethics differ from norms in a particular
society?
Well, norms in a particular society. Uh, Social perceptions
about what you ought to do. And some of
those norms may be perceived to be moral norms,
but they, they, they needn't always be. So sometimes
the society might just think that certain things are
not to be done, but not that they are
morally wrong. It's just that they would let's say
violate etiquette or good manners in a given society.
But it is true, as I've suggested, that sometimes
the society has a perception of what is right
or wrong and will then have an according norm
that societies can be wrong in their judgments just
as individuals can be wrong in their judgments about
what norms ought to prevail. And so what the
philosopher tries to do is to step back from
perceptions about what we ought to do, to see
what we've got best reason for thinking we ought
to do.
So one of the topics as I mentioned uh
in the beginning that you include in your book
has to do with sex. So, and, and you,
you explore different views, I think we could call
them ethical views of sex and uh a pair
of them are the significance view and the casual
view of sex. Could you explain them and do
you prefer one over the other?
Well, it's interesting because the chapter on sex is
the chapter in which I give the least direction
because I'm actually ultimately agnostic on uh which these
two views we ought to take. So to sketch
them briefly, the significance view suggests that in order
for sex to be morally permissible, it must be
the expression of mutual romantic love. And the casual
view would deny that. The casual view of sex
is that sex is just like any other activity
that is prone to cause pleasure, and it, it
doesn't have any special requirements, just as you can
eat a meal, uh, or enjoy an art exhibition
together with somebody who you don't have a deep
affection towards. So you could have sex with somebody
in permissibly without uh having mutual romantic love. And
uh I think at the outset, many people will
be immediately inclined to one or other of these
views. And one of the things I try to
spell out in the chapter is that there's actually
bad news for both of these views, that the
full set of views that any one individual holds
about sexual practices and array of sexual practices is
unlikely to fit with any one of these views.
So something is going to have to be given
up. And so I present really a kind of
dilemma. There is a fallback position that I refer
to. It's not the direct topic of, of most
of my discussion in, in that chapter, but I
do refer to it, and that is the view
that perhaps the significance view is a view not
about what sex is permissible, but a view about
what sex is morally best. So it's not that
it would be impermissible to have sex with somebody
for whom you did not have, uh, with whom
you did not have mutual romantic love, but it
might just be less morally desirable. That's another possible
position. Mhm.
So let's perhaps you explore several different examples of
sexual activities in the book. Let's perhaps pick one
of them and talk about it. When it comes
to rape specifically, on what grounds can it be
morally condemned?
Well, this is a case where both the advocates
of the significance view and the casual view uh
can condemn rape. Both of them can do that.
But it's only the significance view that can show
that there's a special wrong with rape. Because, uh,
they're going to be lots of activities where you
force somebody to do something and the casual view
can say, well, it's wrong. You can force somebody
to eat some food, for example, you can force
them to go to the opera with you, uh,
and that would be wrong to do. And the
advocate of the casualty would similarly be able, similarly
be able to say that forcing somebody to have
sex would be morally wrong. And it might even
be pretty seriously morally wrong, but it wouldn't be
more wrong on the casual view than with forcing
somebody to eat something, for example. And that is
going to strike many people as odd. And the
way to avoid that implication is really by going
for the significance view. Because the significance is wanting
to set sex apart from these other activities that
are prone to cause, uh, pleasure. And I'm, I'm
quite specifically saying prone to cause. It's not that
they have to cause pleasure in every individual instance.
And, uh, so the significance you can very easily
say why there's a special wrong in rape. There's
going to be a much bigger challenge for the
advocate of the casual view to show why that's
the case.
So, is there anything that could be wrong about
masturbation specifically?
Well, again, I think this is a case where
it depends on how exactly you're going to understand
the significance view. On the casual view, obviously there's
nothing wrong and advocates of the casual view are
going to say that that's absolutely fine, that's entirely
intuitive. I think advocates of the significance you could
go in different ways. So one thing you can
say is, well, there's no mutuality in this sexual
activity. So assuming you're using the term masturbation to
refer to what somebody does to themselves as opposed
to, uh, perhaps a mutual masturbation. Uh, AND so
you may say, well, there's no mutuality here and
so it's failing to meet the requirements of this
significance view and therefore it's either impermissible or at
the very least morally less good. But another possibility
is to say, well, because it only involves one
individual, there are no two individuals here and so
the mutuality requirement would fall away. And so the
significance we simply wouldn't apply there and then it
might be permissible on that view. So I can
see different ways in which a significance theorist would
approach that particular question.
And then you also explore another pair of views
that are the reproductive and the anti-reproductive views of
sex. Could you tell us about them?
Yes, a very common view often held among conservatives
is that for sex to be morally permissible, it
must stand the chance of being reproductive. That is
to say, it must stand the chance of producing
offspring. And some conservatives want to use this, for
example, to rule out a homosexual sex, which they
say has no option of, of being reproductive, no
opportunity to be reproductive, would also apply to bestiality.
Um, TO sex with a child who's not gone
through puberty. So they believe that they could say
it could rule out all of these activities. But
they do face a problem because it seems to
also rule out sex between married people who are
for some reason infertile. So if a woman is,
um, A postmenopausal Uh, she and her husband might
not be able to have permissible sex on this
view. Sometimes advocates of the significance view want to
contort themselves in a way to say, well, this
is between an adult male and a female. And
so in principle, it could be reproductive, but that
seems like a highly strained uh rationalization of um
of their view. So it's gonna have that kind
of odd, uh, odd implication. Now, of course, there
are many people who reject the reproductive view, say
sex does not need to be reproductive. And I
think that's an entirely a plausible position. My own
view, for reasons we've discussed in an earlier interview,
is that actually sex should not be reproductive. Uh,
SO I have the anti-reproductive view because I'm an
anti-atalist and think that it's wrong to bring new
sentient beings into existence. I think sex is gonna
be fine, uh, if it's not reproductive. I mean,
there are other conditions as well that you might
apply, including possibly the significance of view, but certainly
a requirement for permissible sex on my view is
that it would not be reproductive.
So antenatalism is part of the set of ethical
questions surrounding sexual practices. Right.
Correct, I think so. But I, I, I do
acknowledge that my views on this are controversial. And
so, and I, this is not, this is not
a tract on, on antenatalism. So I draw attention
to what antenatalists would say about this, but I
also allow the scope that somebody might reject that
particular view. And then assemble a collection of other
views about sexual ethics in order to generate a
practical ethical conclusion.
Mhm. So before we move on to another topic,
let me just ask you, do you think that
it is possible from any of the views we
explore there, the reproductive and the reproductive significant schedule
view or even a combination of them to justify
that all incest is wrong?
Um, THAT'S hard to do. I mean, on the
casual view, there's no way of saying why, why
incest will be, will be wrong. And on the
significance view, of course, it's possible for let's say,
adult siblings to have um mutual romantic love. And
if they're of the opposite sex, then their sex
could be reproductive. But there is this challenge in
that uh sex between closely related people, if it
is reproductive, is much more likely to lead to
abnormalities in the offspring, and that would then, of
course, harm those offspring. And so it may be
that on those grounds, you would say that the
reproductive incestuous sex is wrong, but it can't be
on the grounds of being incestuous per se, because
that's going to meet the significance requirement. It would
be because it actually causes harm that it would
be, that would be wrong.
Mhm. So, now I would like to ask you
a little bit about questions surrounding the environment. So
when it comes to the environment, with ethical questions
or some examples of ethical questions that fall under
the rubric of practical ethics, could you tell us
about some of that?
Well, for a very long time there have been
questions about local pollution, so one could pollute one's
environment locally by littering, for example. And uh polluting
the local water and those are gonna be practical
ethical questions. But in recent decades, a much more
catastrophic issue in a sense is the, the global
environment and our contribution to the global environment. So
if you think about carbon and other greenhouse gas
emissions that we individuals engage in, these contribute in
aggregation to a potentially catastrophic effects from environmental change.
And so that does raise a question, but it's
an interesting question because the emissions of no individual
are going to cause these harms. It's these emissions
in aggregation with others. And that's, this leads to
a very interesting uh ethical problem that actually recurs
in a number of other chapters in the book.
It's the problem of what's known as causal inefficacy
or sometimes inconsequentialism. And this is really about the
question, does it make any difference whether or not
I engage in this activity? Because if I do,
barely any difference of a of a negative kind
will be, uh, will result. And if I don't,
there'll be barely any benefit. But if everybody reasons
that way, then we've got a real problem.
Right, but, uh, but with that in mind, do
you think that even if the vast majority of
individuals are not doing what they can to reduce
emissions, for example, should I as an individual still
have a a duty to do it myself?
Well, I argue that there is a duty, but
that it's a limited duty. So I'm steering a
path between those people who say, because of this
problem of inconsequentialism, there's absolutely no duty at all.
Uh, AND those people who think that we have
very, very substantial duties, uh, with regards to our
individual actions. Uh, I, I think that neither of
those positions are plausible. Uh, MY worry with the
first position is that if we say people have
no duty whatsoever, well, then that is very likely
just to exacerbate the problem because everybody will then
just emmit with abandon. But on the other hand,
to require some individual to stop emitting at fairly
high levels when that comes at quite significant cost
to them. And yet doesn't secure any meaningful good.
It's also hard to say that that person is
required to do that. And so I think our
primary duties are really to support a collective action.
That would result in lowering emissions. So that's where
our strongest duties lie. But we also have some
duties I think, to consider the contribution that we
make to global warming and to try to limit
that. So it's, it's not that you have to
limit it to, to zero net emissions, but you
need to do what you can within reason to,
uh, to limit your contribution.
OK, so let me ask you about an activity
that many, many people out there participate in. Do
you think that in order to reduce emissions, we
should be morally obliged to stop driving?
Well, again, I don't think so because sometimes they're
very important benefits to be derived from, from driving.
Some people, for example, can't get to work without
driving. Uh IF they go to work, they're able
to earn a salary which can support them and
their family. It, they can also contribute to aid,
the subject of, of another chapter. And I think
one's gonna be hard pressed to say that all
of those things must be given up because you
shouldn't be driving. Uh, BUT I do think it's
gonna have an impact on how much driving you
do. So it should impact on decisions, to be
relevant to decisions, for example, to how close to
your work you live. It should be relevant to
question about joy rides. And even joy rides are
going to make relatively little contribution, but you can
have fewer of them rather than more of them.
And so I think we should do what we
can to limit those, but it's a, it's a
constant balance balancing between The amount of sacrifice that
you're making and the amount of harm that you're
preventing. But also recognizing that you are one of
many, many people making that kind of decision. And
so you can't just view it as an individual
decision, you have to recognize it as a decision
that you and others are making.
Mhm. So, to establish here a small link, I
think between the previous topic, sex and the environment,
and going back to the topic of antenatalism, I
guess, how bad is procreation for the environment?
Well, it's pretty bad. One of the things I
point out in the book is that one of
the biggest contributions you can make to, uh, to
global warming is just by having a child. And
I really, I do the mathematics and show how
recycling has a relatively small impact and uh your,
your driving has a greater impact and your flying
is a greater impact, but more than all of
these things is, uh, having a child. With having
a child, certainly in the developed world where average
emission rates are, are really high, is going to
lead to uh a significant environmental impact. Now, I
also look at details about whether you're sharing this
cost, as it were, with your procreative partner. But
even when you take that into account, this is
perhaps the highest emission activity that you can Engage
in. Now, does this tell you to say that
procreation is wrong? No, I don't think it does.
I don't think that this is a definitive argument
against procreation. It's probably an argument for reproducing less
than you otherwise would. Uh, BUT the arguments are
advanced in the earlier books since most especially better
than never to have been, those are arguments that
I think produce a categorical, uh, injunction against procreating.
And so the interesting thing is when you combine
that argument with the environment, environmental argument, then you
get a somewhat overdetermined argument against procreation. It's not
that the environmental argument by itself will do the
work, but it certainly bolsters up the antenatalist argument
uh that I advanced in earlier books.
Mhm. So, I would like to ask you now
a little bit about smoking. I mean, this is
a topic that uh here in Portugal, for example,
has been very relevant in recent years because there
have been restrictions enacted on it in particular places
and I would like to ask you, are there
ethical questions associated with smoking are these are the
ethical questions associated with smoking just about the harm
it can cause to non-smokers, or are there also
ethical questions to consider in regarding to the acts
of smoking alone and the potential harms to the
smoker?
Thank you. Yes, in the chapter, I do start
out by looking at ethical questions. That arise from
the harm that smoking does to the individual who
is smoking. And there are some ethical views that
would deny that that's relevant. In other words, some
people think that ethics is really just about what
you do to other people. Uh, AND I reject
that view. It may be that some of the
more important ethical issues are of that kind, but
I do think that if we understand ethics as
how you ought to live, then there can be
questions. ABOUT purely self-regarding actions, actions that affect only
yourself that fall within the uh scope of ethics.
And my suggestion here is that if you're not
already a smoker, then you ought not to become
a smoker because this is a dangerous activity to
yourself and to others. Uh, IT'S also an expensive
activity and it's an addictive activity. It's not as
though you can readily revisit this decision later once
you've become addicted. And so I think there are
very good reasons not to start smoking. But I
also exhibit an awareness of what it's like for
a smoker, somebody who's already smoking, and I certainly
can imagine circumstances in which somebody who's already a
smoker may be under no obligation to give it
up, uh, based on the effect on themselves, but
there would still be questions about the effect of
their smoking on other people. Mhm.
Sometimes smokers who are not fond of restrictions evoke
examples of other activities that most people participate in
like driving that they say are even more harmful
to humans and the environment, but no one cares
about restricting them. Do they have a point here?
I don't think so. And the driving analogy is
one that I looked at in this chapter, or
more specifically in an appendix to the chapter. I'm
afraid my empirical inquiries here have not yielded a
definitive answer on whether driving, the collective effects of
driving are worse than the collective effects of, of
smoking. It's because it's really hard to get comparative
data and hard to know what the appropriate denominator
is sometimes in these, uh, in these comparisons. Uh,
BUT Uh, even if we set that aside, driving
has a benefit. Very often, not always, but very
often, that smoking doesn't have. And so to ask
people not to smoke in the presence of non-smokers
is not like asking somebody not to drive. Not
to drive can involve a much greater sacrifice for
people. That's not to say that they're gonna be
no restrictions on how we may drive and Uh,
what kind of engines we should have and what
kind of uh petroleum or gas should be used
in, in the, in the running of those cars.
All of those questions are still entirely pertinent. But
I, I don't think that appealing to the acceptability
of car driving or the widespread acceptability of car
driving as a basis for condoning cigarette smoking is
a plausible argument.
And, and by the way, how about electronic cigarettes?
Are they any better than regular cigarettes at this
point? What do we know about their potential harms?
Again, uh, my empirical investigation there suggests that we
don't yet have all the data that we need
to, uh, to make comparisons in part because electronic
cigarettes have just not been around for as long
as tobacco cigarettes have been. And so, and also
there are lots of variations between different forms of,
uh, of e uh smoking. So that's hard to
know, but again, I would encourage people not to
start uh smoking if they're not already smokers, because
there seems to be very little, in fact, nothing
to be gained and lots to be lost, uh,
from, uh from starting off with, with e-cigarettes. And
then again, uh probably best not to smoke in
the presence of smoking those kinds of cigarettes in
the presence of non-smokers, uh, if for no other
reason than just out of caution, but there is
some evidence as well that this might be harmful
to others.
So shifting gears to giving aid, which is another
topic you explored in the book. First of all,
how do we identify people who need aid and
the ones that should be the recipients of it?
Well, that's a really hard question. But perhaps a
harder question still is, of all the people who
need aid, who should we be helping? Because the
need probably outstrips the resources. Certainly, it's gonna outstrip
the resources of any individual. And so you need
to decide how best to allocate your resources. And
that's a practical question that really varies from moment
to moment. I can't give Uh, any guidance here
either in the book or now, that would be
enduring. And many of these charity guidance organizations like
Give Well are well known for varying their recommendations.
So at a given time, they'll make one recommendation
and at another time, they'll make another recommendation because
the relevant facts might change. For example, if they
recommend aid to a particular organization, there may be
a, a burst of aid to that organization. And,
and then that organization has got more for the
moment than it can actually process. And so it
may then make more sense to divert some resources
uh to, uh, to another, another organization. And so
I don't think that highly specific advice can be
given, yeah, but there's no shortage of people who
are in dire need, people who, people and animals,
by the way, uh, who are suffering unbearably and
could, could benefit from, from assistance.
And how do we determine to what point we
should be morally obliged to give aid to someone
and when does it become too demanding?
Well, this is a very deep question in ethics
more generally, even if we move beyond practical ethics.
And I do through these practical ethical issues, uh
try to formulate a view about this. And again,
I opt for something of a middle path between
two kinds of extreme views. I, I don't always
think middle paths are the correct parts, uh, but
in this case, among some others, uh, I think
that The very, very demanding views that people like
Peter Singer have advanced, I think are implausible, but
so too are the view, uh, are the views
that we have no duties uh to positively aid
uh people who are in need. I think there's
some kind of intermediate position, and I think the
intermediate position is the most reasonable one, and that's
the reason why we should settle upon it. And
I go into quite some detail in the book
trying to gauge what that might be, where that
middle part might lie. But it might not be
a strict.
Uh, COULD you just tell us about uh Peter
Singer's position and why you think it is implausible?
Well, it's hard to summarize my responses in a
short space of time. I go into quite a
lot of detail in the book trying to imagine
various interpretations of what he's saying and then considering
various objections to it. But uh his view is
really rests on a principle. And the principle is
that if you can prevent something very bad from
happening without sacrificing anything of comparable moral significance, then
you ought to do it. And the example that
he often uses to illustrate this or to generate
the principle, there's some dispute about what exactly he's,
he's doing there, uh, is the case of a
child drowning in a pond. You're going to work
and you see this child drowning in a pond,
and you could save the child, but that would
involve wading into the pond, damaging your fairly expensive
shoes and making the bottom of your pants wet
and have you arrive at work a little late.
And most people would reach the conclusion that it
would be morally indecent, morally wrong, if you were
to just walk by the child and allow the
child to die. What you ought to do is
step in. Because you are in this case preventing
something very bad from happening, uh, and it comes
only at the cost of something that is not
of comparable moral significance. And that seems perfectly reasonable
in the single case. But the worry is that
if you aggregate that over all the possible instances
that you could save somebody uh through charitable donations,
then you reach his conclusion that you ought to
give away most of what you have. And indeed
beyond that, in fact, even choose your profession based
on what can generate the most resources. So perhaps
you shouldn't be a podcaster. Uh, PERHAPS you should
work in a higher paying, uh, profession like dentistry,
for example. And, um, and then you could generate
more resources in order to, uh, to feed the
world's poor. And my view is that this really
amounts to a kind of voluntary self-enslavement. Because if
you now need to do the kind of work
that you don't want to do, that you don't
get fulfillment from doing, and you have to do
something else, then, uh, that's, that's like a kind
of enslavement. And that's a pretty significant cost. It
may, it may not be comparable, but it's nonetheless
pretty significant. And I think it's unreasonable to ask
that of individuals, especially when you're not responsible for
having caused all of these problems. If if if
you'd cause somebody's absolute poverty, then I think you'd
have very robust duties to, to bail them out
of that. But if this is a result of
multiple other causes, including, by the way, their parents
producing them. Then it's not clear to me that
the extent of your duty is anything like as
as serious as, as, as he suggests.
When it comes specifically to our consumption of meat
and other animal products, how much suffering and death
are we causing per year? I mean, what numbers
are we talking about?
Billions of animals. In fact, probably billions of animals
every day. Uh, IF you just think about how
many fish are drawn, tiny fish are drawn out
of the ocean, bigger fish as well, the number
of chickens that are killed, uh, cows, sheep, goats,
pigs, uh, there are 8 billion people on the
planet and the vast majority of those eat animals.
We're causing a vast amount of, of death and
suffering. And this has really been exacerbated by the
increase in the number of intensive farms, factory farms.
Where animals suffer even more than they would ordinarily.
And how do we determine if some of these
suffering, and I mean by this suffering, I'm not
only limiting it to the suffering of non-human animals,
but also humans, uh, like for example, extreme poverty
and other things that we talked about when we
were talking about giving aid. I mean, how do
we determine if some of this suffering is justified?
Well, it's on what basis would you think that
any of this suffering is justified?
I mean, I don't know, perhaps because some people
would argue that we get some benefit from it
or more more other people get. Some benefit from
it. Well,
let's separate out I think the, the famine cases,
the absolute poverty cases from the animal cases. The
vast majority of people on earth do not need
to eat animals or animal products in order to
lead healthy lives. And in fact, would probably, probably
lead healthier lives without consuming those products. Now, that's
not true for every last human being, but it's
also not true for every last human being that
failing to eat human beings is uh uh is
uh unnecessary because there are gonna be circumstances where
cannibalism may be necessary to, to save somebody's life.
But that's not ordinarily true and so it's not
a case for ordinarily consuming human flesh. And ditto,
there may be some circumstances in which you need
to eat animal flesh in order to survive, but
that's not true in most cases.
Mhm. So, uh, but do you think that when
it comes to using animal products or, or, or
using animals themselves, like, for example, not eating them,
but in testing new drugs that uh uh a
case like that is morally justified or not.
Well, first of all, animal experimentation falls, I think
outside of the purview of this particular book because
this is now no longer a quotidian ethical issue.
It's an issue in, in scientific ethics or bioethics
more generally. Uh, AND there are lots of questions
there, uh. It's a much more complicated story precisely
because people think that something more important is at
stake than is at stake, if you excuse that
expression, uh, when people are eating steaks. But there
are lots of problems. I mean, first of all,
Animals are not the best models for human disease,
precisely because they're a different species. The the best
models for human disease are gonna be humans. And
a lot of people want to say, well, but
humans may not be experimented on. And a lot
of animal rights advocates are going to say, yeah,
and animals may also not be experimented on. So,
If you're justifying this on the basis of a
utilitarian calculus, you're saying that sacrificing some small number
could produce a great amount of good. It may
well be that by sacrificing a small number of
human beings, you'd actually produce more good because you'd
have a much more reliable model for what you're
testing. If you're not willing to follow through with
the argument in the case of humans, then it
suggests that you're not merely doing a utilitarian calculation.
There's something else that's going on when you Uh,
when you invoke that argument to justify animal experimentation,
non-human animal experimentation. So there, there, there are lots
of issues there which I suppose we shouldn't really
enter into now because they do indeed go beyond
the domain of quotidian ethics.
Right. So, I would like to get now a
little bit into the domain of language and certain
uses of language. So, are there instances where it
can be immoral, immoral to utter or write certain
words or expressions?
Well, I do distinguish as many philosophers do between
using and mentioning a word. And I think that
very often using certain words is going to be
wrong because certain words are intended as insults. And
unless you've got good reason for insulting somebody, you
shouldn't be doing it. I'm, I'm not saying insulting
somebody is never justified, but it's typically not going
to be justified on the basis, let's say of
somebody's race or their sex or their sexual orientation.
Those kinds of slurs or insults, very hard to
see how they could be, uh, they could be
justified. And so I think that That those are
gonna be wrong. But what many people don't do
is they don't recognize the distinction between using uh
a slur, for example, and mentioning it. When you
mention the slurs, you're not using it. You're not
directing a slur at somebody, there's a sense in
which you're really referring to it. And uh I
think the mistake that people make here is they
attribute a kind of magical power to either the
auditory sounds or to the scratchings that make up
a word. They think that merely uttering it, merely
making that sound or merely making those scratchings by
writing the word has a kind of magical power
that can be harmful and therefore one ought not
to do that. And that to me is just
ridiculous. That is magical thinking. That is no different,
let's say, from people who want to invoke blasphemy
laws and say, well, merely mentioning The name of
God, for example, in the wrong context, amounts to,
amounts to blasphemy. And I do in the book
refer to that wonderful scene in Monty Python's The
Life of Brian, uh, where there, there's a character
who's being stoned for, for blaspheming. And it was
very quickly becomes meta. And when his action is
described, The person who's overseeing the the, the stoning
is now mentioning the name of God rather than
using it in a blasphemous way, and then he
gets stoned. And we can all look on this
and laugh at it, but I think a lot
of people are not going to recognize that the
very same dynamic is at work, the very same
mistake is at work, uh, in, in the mention
of other words today. Not typically the, the name
of God, but other words.
What about talking about today? How about preferred pronouns?
Do you think that people who use nonconventional pronouns
can demand that other people use them? And if
so, would that make intentionally using the incorrect pronouns
something immoral or not?
Well, I do look into this in quite some
detail and with quite some nuance. I do think
that there's a general, although defeasible principle that we
ought to refer to people the way they would
like to be referred to. So, uh, if somebody
has a preference for a particular pronoun, I think
that there is a defeasible presumption in favor of,
of doing that. But there may be circumstances where
you're not morally obliged. I mean, let's imagine somebody
is changing their pronouns every second day and let's
imagine the pronouns they're choosing are highly unusual ones,
uh, sort of a weird constructs of their own
making. Uh, AND it's really hard, especially for people
who struggle even to remember people's names, to now
remember these pronouns as well. The suggestion that you
might not be required, morally required under these circumstances
might be just asking too much of people. So
I can imagine circumstances where you wouldn't be obliged
to do that. But uh the general presumption I
think is referred to people the way they would
like to be uh referred to.
Mhm. So, uh, I would like to ask you
now about some, uh some debates that have been
occurring surrounding the limits of humor. So in what
ways could humor raise moral questions? Are there specific
kinds of humor that should be considered immoral, and
why should we even care about the ethics of
humor?
Good. Well, I think there are two possible grounds
on which we could find fault with humor. The
one is if the humor is an expression of
some defect in the agent. And by the agent,
I mean, either the person who's telling the joke
or the uh or offering the humor or the
person who is appreciating it. So that's one is
the a defect in the agent. The other is
some adverse consequence, and unjustified adverse consequence that results
from some humor. So let me give you examples
of each of them. I mean, let's imagine you
have somebody who is deeply prejudiced, let's say about
a particular racial group. And they now start telling
jokes about that racial group. And other people around
them are appreciating those jokes precisely because they share
those prejudices. Well, now we can find fault with
that humor because it is an expression of uh
the, of the prejudice. But the very same jokes
might not be an expression of prejudice in the
mouths of other people or in the heads of
other people. Other people might enjoy those same jokes
for for another reason. And then I think we
would, we would be justified in not finding fault
with uh, with their appreciation or their utterance of
the, of the jokes. We look at the consequences.
You can imagine a highly combustible environment. Imagine it's
let's say a meeting of the Ku Klux Klux
Klan, and they're telling anti-African American jokes. This could
fuel up, uh, the, the people who are gathered
around and they could go out and they could
perpetrate some real wrongful harm. And I think we
would have a very different and should have a
very different attitude, uh, to The telling of a
joke in that context, then let's say if Dave
Chappelle, the African American comedian, is telling the same
joke or offering the same kind of humor to
a relatively enlightened audience where we are not going
to expect and shouldn't reasonably expect a consequence of,
of that kind to uh to result. So my
sense is generally, we need to be highly context
sensitive in our evaluation of uh of humor.
But uh just by someone getting offended by a
particular joke, does that make it morally problematic?
No, I don't think so, because I think people
can be hypersensitive. They can be misguided. Uh, AND
we, we're not obliged to just to defer to
any inappropriate, uh, and wrongful perception of something. Now
it's not that it may not factor in. It
may be that if you know somebody gets offended
by a particular kind of joke, you should just
rather not tell it to them if, if they're
the intended audience for your joke. But let's imagine
You're broadcasting a joke over a public broadcaster, and
you know that there are lots of people who
are going to appreciate it. The mere fact that
there's an individual or some small number of individuals
out there who will take offense at it. That
by itself is not a definitive. Indication that you
should not tell the joke.
Mhm. So let me ask you then just one
last question. Uh, WE'VE talked about some of these
related to some pairs of topics that you explore
in the book, but do you think that there
are any common threads that run through all the
ethical issues you explore in your book?
I'm not sure about all, but there's certainly threads
that run through a number of, of topics. So
for example, the question about causal inefficacy that I
mentioned earlier, that arises in the environmental case as
we discussed. It also arises in the case of
eating meat because if you go into a supermarket
and you have purchased a steak, let's say, It's
not clear that that by itself is going to
result in increased demand for steaks and leads to
the suffering of any further animals. And so the
question arises there. Uh, IT also, uh, arises in
Uh, in, in, in an array of, of other
topics. So smoking, for example, if you, if you
smoke in the presence of a non-smoker, the effect,
the ill effect that that's going to have on
the non-smoker is negligible. There's a, it's a very
minor increase in, in risk. But obviously, if this
is aggregated across many smokers, then you're going to
have uh much higher increased levels of risk for,
for the non-smokers. And so one of the things
that I do in the conclusion is look at
that problem of causal inefficacy. I point out not
only the similarities of how it arises in these
different cases, but also differences between them. And there
are quite, quite crucial differences between them that I
think should lead us to evaluate these different cases
in different ways. So for example, in the environmental
case, The, the harm arises through an aggregation of
harmless activities. Whereas in the animal case, the harm
gets obscured by an aggregation of individual cases. If
you had to kill a cow in order to
eat it, the connection between the eating and the
killing would be very obvious. It's when you have
an aggregation of, of meat eating and the outsourcing,
as it were, of the killing and butchering and
and preparation of the meat. That the harm that
you do now gets obscured, uh, through the aggregation
of multiple activities. And I think that is a
relevant difference to what we should in fact do
in practice. I think it suggests we should not
be eating animals, uh, ever. I mean, well, almost
ever. There may be highly exceptional cases, but we
should generally not be eating animals, whereas it's permissible
to engage in some carbon emitting uh practices because
that is in itself harmless. It's when it aggregates
that it becomes problematic.
Mhm. So, the book is again very practical ethics,
engaging everyday moral questions, I'm leaving a link to
it in the description of the interview. And Doctor
Benatar, just before we go, are there any particular
places on the internet where people can find your
work?
None that I control. So I, I'm afraid I'm
not, I'm not very much online. So people just
have to look, but thank
you. OK, fair enough. So thank you so much
for taking the time to come on the show
again. It's always a pleasure to talk with you.
Thank you for having me. Always a pleasure to
speak with you.
Hi guys, thank you for watching this interview until
the end. If you liked it, please share it,
leave a like and hit the subscription button. The
show is brought to you by Nights Learning and
Development done differently, check their website at Nights.com and
also please consider supporting the show on Patreon or
PayPal. I would also like to give a huge
thank you to my main patrons and PayPal supporters
Pergo Larsson, Jerry Mullerns, Fredrik Sundo, Bernard Seyches Olaf,
Alexandam Castle, Matthew Whitting Berarna Wolf, Tim Hollis, Erika
Lenny, John Connors, Philip Fors Connolly. Then the Matter
Robert Windegaruyasi Zu Mark Neevs called Holbrookfield governor Michael
Stormir, Samuel Andre, Francis Forti Agnsergoro and Hal Herzognun
Macha Joan Labran Juarsent and Samuel Corriere, Heinz, Mark
Smith, Jore, Tom Hummel, Sardus France David Sloan Wilson,
asilla dearraujurumen ro Diego Londono Correa. Yannick Punteran Rosmani
Charlotte blinikolbar Adamhn Pavlostaevsky nale back medicine, Gary Galman
Sam of Zallidrianei Poltonin John Barboza, Julian Price, Edward
Hall Edin Bronner, Douglas Fry, Franco Bartolotti Gabrielon Corteseus
Slelitsky, Scott Zachary Fish Tim Duffyani Smith John Wieman.
Daniel Friedman, William Buckner, Paul Georgianneau, Luke Lovai Giorgio
Theophanous, Chris Williamson, Peter Vozin, David Williams, Diocosta, Anton
Eriksson, Charles Murray, Alex Shaw, Marie Martinez, Coralli Chevalier,
bungalow atheists, Larry D. Lee Junior, old Eringbo. Sterry
Michael Bailey, then Sperber, Robert Gray Zigoren, Jeff McMann,
Jake Zu, Barnabas radix, Mark Campbell, Thomas Dovner, Luke
Neeson, Chris Stor, Kimberly Johnson, Benjamin Gilbert, Jessica Nowicki,
Linda Brendon, Nicholas Carlsson, Ismael Bensleyman. George Eoriatis, Valentin
Steinman, Perkrolis, Kate van Goller, Alexander Hubbert, Liam Dunaway,
BR Masoud Ali Mohammadi, Perpendicular John Nertner, Ursula Gudinov,
Gregory Hastings, David Pinsoff Sean Nelson, Mike Levine, and
Jos Net. A special thanks to my producers. These
are Webb, Jim, Frank Lucas Steffinik, Tom Venneden, Bernard
Curtis Dixon, Benedic Muller, Thomas Trumbull, Catherine and Patrick
Tobin, Gian Carlo Montenegroal Ni Cortiz and Nick Golden,
and to my executive producers, Matthew Levender, Sergio Quadrian,
Bogdan Kanivets, and Rosie. Thank you for all.